Created AI-powered-insights.md (#1679)
telerik/reporting-docs: interactivity/AI-powered-insights.md

---

> title: AI-powered insights in Report Preview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: AI-Powered Insights in Report Preview
```

> page_title: AI-powered insights in Report Preview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
page_title: AI-Powered Insights in Report Preview
```

description: "Learn how to implement a prompt UI as part of the Web report viewer"
slug: telerikreporting/designing-reports/adding-interactivity-to-reports/ai-powered-insights

> tags: telerik, reporting, ai, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: telerik, reporting, ai
```

published: True
position: 1
---

> # AI-powered insights Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# AI-Powered Insights Overview
```

> The AI-powered insights in Report Preview provide comprehensive capabilities, including response generation, prompt creation, AI output interaction, and execution of predefined commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AI-powered insights during report preview provide comprehensive capabilities, including response generation, prompt creation, AI output interaction, and execution of predefined commands.
```

> ## OpenAI Implementations

Reviewer: Are these options indeed specific to the OpenAI-based LLMs? What about `Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Ollama` - does it display different options? Consider adding an entry sentence to these bullets and clarifying this.

> * Ask AI: This functionality enables users to pose questions to the AI, facilitating interactive and dynamic responses based on the provided document context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ask AI: This window allows users to ask questions to the AI, facilitating dynamic responses based on the document context.
```

> * Output: This feature generates outputs from the AI, including summaries, highlights, and other predefined commands, enhancing the overall productivity and efficiency of the report viewer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Output: This window displays the outputs generated from the AI.
```

## Configure the AI

| Setting | Description |
| ------ | ------ |

> |friendlyName|This setting specifies the name corresponding to the type of AI client you wish to use. For example, setting friendlyName to "MicrosoftExtensionsAzureOpenAI" indicates that the Azure OpenAI client is being utilized|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|friendlyName|This setting specifies the name corresponding to the type of AI client you wish to use. For example, setting friendlyName to "MicrosoftExtensionsAzureOpenAI" indicates that the Azure OpenAI client is being utilized.|
```

> |model|This setting specifies the AI model to be used for generating responses. For example, setting the model to "gpt-4o-mini" indicates that the GPT-4 model variant is being utilized|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|model|This setting specifies the AI model to be used for generating responses. For example, setting the model to "gpt-4o-mini" indicates that the GPT-4o mini model variant is being utilized.|
```

> |endpoint|This setting specifies the URL of the AI service endpoint|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|endpoint|This setting specifies the URL of the AI service endpoint.|
```

> |credential|This setting specifies the authentication credentials required to access the AI service. It ensures that the AI client can securely connect to the specified endpoint|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|credential|This setting specifies the authentication credentials required to access the AI service. It ensures that the AI client can securely connect to the specified endpoint.|
```

> |requireConsent|A boolean configuration switch that determines whether users must explicitly consent to the use of AI models before the AI report insights features can be utilized within the application|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|requireConsent|A boolean configuration option that determines whether users must explicitly consent to the use of AI models before the AI report insights features can be utilized within the application.|
```

> |allowCustomPrompts|This setting is set to false by default. If you set it to `true`, you will not be allowed to ask anything except the predefined prompts. For example, if you write "Hi" it will throw an exception|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|allowCustomPrompts|This setting is set to false by default. If you set it to `true`, users will not be allowed to ask anything except the predefined prompts.|
```

> |predefinedPrompts|This setting specifies a list of predefined prompts that the AI client can use. Each prompt is defined by a text attribute, which contains the prompt's content|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|predefinedPrompts|This setting specifies a list of predefined prompts that the AI client can use. Each prompt is defined by a text attribute, which contains the prompt's content.|
```

__AI clients__

> We have four available options for the `friendlyName` setting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are four available options for the `friendlyName` setting:
```

|  |  |
| ------ | ------ |
|Microsoft.Extensions.AI.AzureAIInference|"MicrosoftExtensionsAzureAIInference"|
|Microsoft.Extensions.AI.OpenAI + Azure.AI.OpenAI|"MicrosoftExtensionsAzureOpenAI"|
|Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Ollama|"MicrosoftExtensionsOllama"|
|Microsoft.Extensions.AI.OpenAI|"MicrosoftExtensionsOpenAI"|

````JSON
{
	"telerikReporting": {
		"AIClient": {
			"friendlyName": "MicrosoftExtensionsAzureOpenAI",
			"model": "gpt-4o-mini",
			"endpoint": "https://ai-explorations.openai.azure.com/",
			"credential": "...",
			"requireConsent": false,
			"allowCustomPrompts": false,
			"predefinedPrompts": [
				{ "text": "Prompt 1" },
				{ "text": "Prompt 2" }
			]
		}
	}
}
````

````XML
 <Telerik.Reporting>
     <AIClient
         friendlyName="MicrosoftExtensionsAzureOpenAI"
         model="gpt-4o-mini"
         endpoint="https://ai-explorations.openai.azure.com/"
         credential="..."
         requireConsent="false"
         allowCustomPrompts="false">
         <predefinedPrompts>
             <add text="Prompt 1" />
             <add text="Prompt 2" />
         </predefinedPrompts>
     </AIClient>
 </Telerik.Reporting>
````
## Extensibility

> * If necessary, the Reporting engine can use a custom Telerik.Reporting.AI.IClient implementation, which can be registered in the Reporting REST Service configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If necessary, the Reporting engine can use a custom Telerik.Reporting.AI.IClient implementation, which can be registered in the Reporting REST Service configuration:
```

Reviewer: Consider adding a link to the API reference that explains `Telerik.Reporting.AI.IClient` and the `AIClientFactory` option from the REST service configuration.

````C#
builder.Services.TryAddSingleton<IReportServiceConfiguration>(sp => new ReportServiceConfiguration
{
    HostAppId = "MyApp",
    AIClientFactory = GetCustomAIClient,
    ...
});
static Telerik.Reporting.AI.IClient GetCustomAIClient()
{
    return new MyCustomAIClient(...);
}
````

> * The configured predefined prompts can be modified at runtime by overriding the "UpdateAIPrompts" method of the ReportsController class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the configured predefined prompts can be modified at runtime by overriding the "UpdateAIPrompts" method of the ReportsController class.
```

Reviewer: Consider adding a link to the API reference here as well.
